CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

## Development setup

### Installation

This project uses [Mise-en-place](https://mise.jdx.dev/) as a manager of tool versions (`python`, `uv`, `nodejs`, `pnpm`
etc.), as well as a task runner and environment manager. Mise will download all the needed tools automatically -- you
don't need to install them yourself.

Clone this project, then run these setup steps:

```sh
brew install mise # more ways to install: https://mise.jdx.dev/installing-mise.html
mise trust
mise install
```

After setup, you can use:

* `mise run` to list tasks and select one interactively to run

* `mise <task-name>` to run a task

* `mise x -- <command>` to run a project tool -- for example `mise x -- uv add <package>`

If you want to run tools directly without the `mise x --` prefix, you need to activate a shell hook:

* Bash: `eval "$(mise activate bash)"` (add to `~/.bashrc` to make permanent)

* Zsh: `eval "$(mise activate zsh)"` (add to `~/.zshrc` to make permanent)

* Fish: `mise activate fish | source` (add to `~/.config/fish/config.fish` to make permanent)

* Other shells: [documentation](https://mise.jdx.dev/installing-mise.html#shells)

### Configuration

Edit `[env]` in `mise.local.toml` in the project root ([documentation](https://mise.jdx.dev/environments/)). Run
`mise setup` if you don't see the file.

### Running the platform from source

Starting up the platform using the CLI (`beeai platform start`, even `mise beeai-cli:run -- platform start`) will use
**published images** by default. To use local images, you need to build them and import them into the platform.

Instead, use:

```shell
mise beeai-platform:start
```

This will build the images (`beeai-server` and `beeai-ui`) and import them to the cluster. You can add other
CLI arguments as you normally would when using `beeai` CLI, for example:

```shell
mise beeai-platform:start --set docling.enabled=true
```

To stop or delete the platform use

```shell
mise beeai-platform:stop
mise beeai-platform:delete
```

For debugging and direct access to kubernetes, setup `KUBECONFIG` and other environment variables using:

```shell
# Activate environment
eval "$(mise run beeai-platform:shell)"

# Deactivate environment
deactivate
```

### Enabling or disabling auth flows for beeai_cli
- update beeai-cli/src/beeai_cli/configuration.py and toggle the value of auth_disabled as needed
```Python
auth_disabled: bool = False
```
When auth_disabled is `False`:

- Add an entry to /etc/hosts on your local system:
```
# Added by BEEAI-PLATFORM
127.0.0.1        beeai-platform.api.testing
```

Update OAuth credentials in helm/values.yaml under:

```YAML
oidc:
  enabled: true
  discovery_url: <your_oidc_discovery_endpoint_here>
  client_id: <your_client_id_here>
  jwks_url: <your_jwks_endpoint_here>
  AUTH_TRUST_HOST: true
  NEXTAUTH_URL: https://beeai-platform.api.testing:8336
  AUTH_REDIRECT_PROXY_URL: https://beeai-platform.api.testing:8336
  AUTH_IBM_AUTHORIZATION: <your_authorization_endpoint_here>
  AUTH_IBM_USERINFO: <your_userinfo_endpoint>
  AUTH_IBM_ISSUER: <your_issuer>
  AUTH_IBM_TOKEN:  <your_token_endpoint>
  # base64 encoded client secret
  AUTH_IBM_SECRET: <your_base64_encoded_client_secret>
  # base64 encoded auth secret
  AUTH_SECRET: <your_next_auth_secret>
```

This branch enables istio by default, and creates a gateway & routes for `https://beeai-platform.api.testing:8336/` .  The intent being that tokens returned by OAuth routes are receieved in the browser over HTTPS rather than plain text HTTP to prevent unauthorized use of tokens.

The default namespace is labeled istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient so all intra pod trafic is via ztunnel with the exception of the beeai-platform pod due to it's use of the hostNetwork (istio can not bring a hostNetwork enabled pod into the mesh).


### Running and debugging individual components

It's desirable to run and debug (i.e. in an IDE) individual components against the full stack (PostgreSQL,
OpenTelemetry, Arize Phoenix, ...). For this, we include [Telepresence](https://telepresence.io/) which allows rewiring
a Kubernetes container to your local machine. (Note that `sshfs` is not needed, since we don't use it in this setup.)

```sh
mise run beeai-server:dev:start
```

This will do the following:

1. Create .env file if it doesn't exist yet (you can add your configuration here)
2. Stop default platform VM ("beeai") if it exists
3. Start a new VM named "beeai-local-dev" separate from the "beeai" VM used by default
4. Install telepresence into the cluster
   > Note that this will require **root access** on your machine, due to setting up a networking stack.
5. Replace beeai-platform in the cluster and forward any incoming traffic to localhost

After the command succeeds, you can:

- send requests as if your machine was running inside the cluster. For example:
  `curl http://<service-name>:<service-port>`.
- connect to postgresql using the default credentials `postgresql://beeai-user:password@postgresql:5432/beeai`
- now you can start your server from your IDE or using `mise run beeai-server:run` on port **18333**
- run beeai-cli using `mise beeai-cli:run -- <command>` or HTTP requests to localhost:8333 or localhost:18333
    - localhost:8333 is port-forwarded from the cluster, so any requests will pass through the cluster networking to the
      beeai-platform pod, which is replaced by telepresence and forwarded back to your local machine to port 18333
    - localhost:18333 is where your local platform should be running

To inspect cluster using `kubectl` or `k9s` and lima using `limactl`, activate the dev environment using:

```shell
# Activate dev environment
eval "$(mise run beeai-server:dev:shell)"

# Deactivate dev environment
deactivate
```

When you're done you can stop the development cluster and networking using

```shell
mise run beeai-server:dev:stop
```

Or delete the cluster entirely using

```shell
mise run beeai-server:dev:delete
```

> TIP: If you run into connection issues after sleep or longer period of inactivity
> try `mise run beeai-server:dev:reconnect` first. You may not need to clean and restart
> the entire VM

#### Developing tests

We use a separate VM for local development of e2e and integration tests, the setup is almost identical,
but you need to change kubeconfig location in your .env:

```shell
# Use for developing e2e and integration tests locally
K8S_KUBECONFIG=~/.beeai/lima/beeai-local-test/copied-from-guest/kubeconfig.yaml
```

and then run `beeai-server:dev:test:start`

> TIP: Similarly to dev environment you can use `mise run beeai-server:dev:test:reconnect`

<details>
<summary> Lower-level networking using telepresence directly</summary>

```shell
# Activate environment
eval "$(mise run beeai-server:dev:shell)"

# Start platform
mise beeai-cli:run -- platform start --vm-name=beeai-local-dev # optional --tag [tag] --import-images
mise x -- telepresence helm install
mise x -- telepresence connect

# Receive traffic to a pod by replacing it in the cluster
mise x -- telepresence replace <pod-name>

# More information about how replace/intercept/ingress works can be found in the [Telepresence documentation](https://telepresence.io/docs/howtos/engage).
# Once done, quit Telepresence using:
```sh
mise x -- telepresence quit
```

</details>

#### Ollama

If you want to run this local setup against Ollama you must use a special option when setting up the LLM:

```
beeai env setup --use-true-localhost
```

### Working with migrations

The following commands can be used to create or run migrations in the dev environment above:

- Run migrations: `mise run beeai-server:migrations:run`
- Generate migrations: `mise run beeai-server:migrations:generate`
- Use Alembic command directly: `mise run beeai-server:migrations:alembic`

> NOTE: The dev setup will run the locally built image including its migrations before replacing it with your local
> instance. If new migrations you just implemented are not working, the dev setup will not start properly and you need
> to fix migrations first. You can activate the shell using `eval "$(mise run beeai-server:dev:shell)"` and use
> your favorite kubernetes IDE (e.g., k9s or kubectl) to see the migration logs.

### Running individual components

To run BeeAI components in development mode (ensuring proper rebuilding), use the following commands.

#### Server

Build and run server using setup described in [Running the platform from source](#running-the-platform-from-source)
Or use development setup described
in [Running and debugging individual components](#running-and-debugging-individual-components)

#### CLI

```sh
mise beeai-cli:run -- agent list
mise beeai-cli:run -- agent run website_summarizer "summarize iambee.ai"
```

#### UI

```sh
# run the UI development server:
mise beeai-ui:run

# UI is also available from beeai-server (in static mode):
mise beeai-server:run
```

## Releasing

> ⚠️ **IMPORTANT**   
> Always create pre-release before the actual public release and check that the upgrade and installation work.

Use the release script:

```shell
mise run release
```

Commit message:

chore: make toggle of oidc a single .env var

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

## Development setup

### Installation

This project uses [Mise-en-place](https://mise.jdx.dev/) as a manager of tool versions (`python`, `uv`, `nodejs`, `pnpm`
etc.), as well as a task runner and environment manager. Mise will download all the needed tools automatically -- you
don't need to install them yourself.

Clone this project, then run these setup steps:

```sh
brew install mise # more ways to install: https://mise.jdx.dev/installing-mise.html
mise trust
mise install
```

After setup, you can use:

* `mise run` to list tasks and select one interactively to run

* `mise <task-name>` to run a task

* `mise x -- <command>` to run a project tool -- for example `mise x -- uv add <package>`

If you want to run tools directly without the `mise x --` prefix, you need to activate a shell hook:

* Bash: `eval "$(mise activate bash)"` (add to `~/.bashrc` to make permanent)

* Zsh: `eval "$(mise activate zsh)"` (add to `~/.zshrc` to make permanent)

* Fish: `mise activate fish | source` (add to `~/.config/fish/config.fish` to make permanent)

* Other shells: [documentation](https://mise.jdx.dev/installing-mise.html#shells)

### Configuration

Edit `[env]` in `mise.local.toml` in the project root ([documentation](https://mise.jdx.dev/environments/)). Run
`mise setup` if you don't see the file.

### Running the platform from source

Starting up the platform using the CLI (`beeai platform start`, even `mise beeai-cli:run -- platform start`) will use
**published images** by default. To use local images, you need to build them and import them into the platform.

Instead, use:

```shell
mise beeai-platform:start
```

This will build the images (`beeai-server` and `beeai-ui`) and import them to the cluster. You can add other
CLI arguments as you normally would when using `beeai` CLI, for example:

```shell
mise beeai-platform:start --set docling.enabled=true
```

To stop or delete the platform use

```shell
mise beeai-platform:stop
mise beeai-platform:delete
```

For debugging and direct access to kubernetes, setup `KUBECONFIG` and other environment variables using:

```shell
# Activate environment
eval "$(mise run beeai-platform:shell)"

# Deactivate environment
deactivate
```

### Enabling or disabling auth flows for beeai_cli

- Copy the apps/beeai-cli/.env.template as .env
- To turn on oauth on platform startup set `BEEAI__OIDC_ENABLED=True` in the .env file.
- Add an entry to /etc/hosts on your local system:
```
# Added by BEEAI-PLATFORM
127.0.0.1        beeai-platform.api.testing
```

- Update OAuth credentials in helm/values.yaml under:

```YAML
oidc:
  enabled: true
  discovery_url: <your_oidc_discovery_endpoint_here>
  client_id: <your_client_id_here>
  client_secret: <your_oidc_client_secret>
  issuer: <your_issuer>
  jwks_url: <your_jwks_endpoint_here>
  nextauth_trust_host: true
  nextauth_url: "https://beeai-platform.api.testing:8336"
  nextauth_redirect_proxy_url: "https://beeai-platform.api.testing:8336"
  nextauth_secret: "<To generate a random string, you can use the Auth.js CLI: npx auth secret>
```

This branch enables istio by default, and creates a gateway & routes for `https://beeai-platform.api.testing:8336/` .  The intent being that tokens returned by OAuth routes are receieved in the browser over HTTPS rather than plain text HTTP to prevent unauthorized use of tokens.

The default namespace is labeled istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient so all intra pod trafic is via ztunnel with the exception of the beeai-platform pod due to it's use of the hostNetwork (istio can not bring a hostNetwork enabled pod into the mesh).



### Running and debugging individual components

It's desirable to run and debug (i.e. in an IDE) individual components against the full stack (PostgreSQL,
OpenTelemetry, Arize Phoenix, ...). For this, we include [Telepresence](https://telepresence.io/) which allows rewiring
a Kubernetes container to your local machine. (Note that `sshfs` is not needed, since we don't use it in this setup.)

```sh
mise run beeai-server:dev:start
```

This will do the following:

1. Create .env file if it doesn't exist yet (you can add your configuration here)
2. Stop default platform VM ("beeai") if it exists
3. Start a new VM named "beeai-local-dev" separate from the "beeai" VM used by default
4. Install telepresence into the cluster
   > Note that this will require **root access** on your machine, due to setting up a networking stack.
5. Replace beeai-platform in the cluster and forward any incoming traffic to localhost

After the command succeeds, you can:

- send requests as if your machine was running inside the cluster. For example:
  `curl http://<service-name>:<service-port>`.
- connect to postgresql using the default credentials `postgresql://beeai-user:password@postgresql:5432/beeai`
- now you can start your server from your IDE or using `mise run beeai-server:run` on port **18333**
- run beeai-cli using `mise beeai-cli:run -- <command>` or HTTP requests to localhost:8333 or localhost:18333
    - localhost:8333 is port-forwarded from the cluster, so any requests will pass through the cluster networking to the
      beeai-platform pod, which is replaced by telepresence and forwarded back to your local machine to port 18333
    - localhost:18333 is where your local platform should be running

To inspect cluster using `kubectl` or `k9s` and lima using `limactl`, activate the dev environment using:

```shell
# Activate dev environment
eval "$(mise run beeai-server:dev:shell)"

# Deactivate dev environment
deactivate
```

When you're done you can stop the development cluster and networking using

```shell
mise run beeai-server:dev:stop
```

Or delete the cluster entirely using

```shell
mise run beeai-server:dev:delete
```

> TIP: If you run into connection issues after sleep or longer period of inactivity
> try `mise run beeai-server:dev:reconnect` first. You may not need to clean and restart
> the entire VM

#### Developing tests

We use a separate VM for local development of e2e and integration tests, the setup is almost identical,
but you need to change kubeconfig location in your .env:

```shell
# Use for developing e2e and integration tests locally
K8S_KUBECONFIG=~/.beeai/lima/beeai-local-test/copied-from-guest/kubeconfig.yaml
```

and then run `beeai-server:dev:test:start`

> TIP: Similarly to dev environment you can use `mise run beeai-server:dev:test:reconnect`

<details>
<summary> Lower-level networking using telepresence directly</summary>

```shell
# Activate environment
eval "$(mise run beeai-server:dev:shell)"

# Start platform
mise beeai-cli:run -- platform start --vm-name=beeai-local-dev # optional --tag [tag] --import-images
mise x -- telepresence helm install
mise x -- telepresence connect

# Receive traffic to a pod by replacing it in the cluster
mise x -- telepresence replace <pod-name>

# More information about how replace/intercept/ingress works can be found in the [Telepresence documentation](https://telepresence.io/docs/howtos/engage).
# Once done, quit Telepresence using:
```sh
mise x -- telepresence quit
```

</details>

#### Ollama

If you want to run this local setup against Ollama you must use a special option when setting up the LLM:

```
beeai env setup --use-true-localhost
```

### Working with migrations

The following commands can be used to create or run migrations in the dev environment above:

- Run migrations: `mise run beeai-server:migrations:run`
- Generate migrations: `mise run beeai-server:migrations:generate`
- Use Alembic command directly: `mise run beeai-server:migrations:alembic`

> NOTE: The dev setup will run the locally built image including its migrations before replacing it with your local
> instance. If new migrations you just implemented are not working, the dev setup will not start properly and you need
> to fix migrations first. You can activate the shell using `eval "$(mise run beeai-server:dev:shell)"` and use
> your favorite kubernetes IDE (e.g., k9s or kubectl) to see the migration logs.

### Running individual components

To run BeeAI components in development mode (ensuring proper rebuilding), use the following commands.

#### Server

Build and run server using setup described in [Running the platform from source](#running-the-platform-from-source)
Or use development setup described
in [Running and debugging individual components](#running-and-debugging-individual-components)

#### CLI

```sh
mise beeai-cli:run -- agent list
mise beeai-cli:run -- agent run website_summarizer "summarize iambee.ai"
```

#### UI

```sh
# run the UI development server:
mise beeai-ui:run

# UI is also available from beeai-server (in static mode):
mise beeai-server:run
```

## Releasing

> ⚠️ **IMPORTANT**   
> Always create pre-release before the actual public release and check that the upgrade and installation work.

Use the release script:

```shell
mise run release
```
